[Music]
the Greek philosopher Plato first
described Atlantis in the year 360 BC I
wasn't around then but ever since people
have been enamored with this lost
continent what happened to it what was
it like did they eat cheeseburgers did
Atlantis ever even exist at all
unfortunately the answer to that last
question is probably no still there
might be some hope as geologists stumble
across lost continents more often than
you might think
here are three sunken lands that might
hold you over until the fish people turn
up number one greater Adria we might as
well start with the most recent undersea
discovery a sunken continent lost
between the waters of the Mediterranean
Sea called Greater Adria and it's a lot
older than Atlantis is said to be as you
probably remember from elementary school
all of the Earth's landmass was once
combined into a single massive
supercontinent known as Pangaea about
200 million years ago I wasn't around
that the continents split into the
northern half known as Laurasia would
become Europe Asia and North America
geologist called the southern landmass
Gondwana
and it would eventually split into what
we now know as Africa South America
Australia and Antarctica well this was
happening a few chunks of what would
become Africa decided to jump ship and
head back the way they came the largest
of these chunks would form a continent
known as Greater Adria so named for its
proximity to the modern-day adriatic sea
between what is now Italy and the
Balkans now if you're imagining a vast
expanse of land similar in size to
Africa or at least Australia you may
pull back a bit on your expectations the
continental plate might have been
roughly the size of Greenland king of
the islands but was actually divided
into several smaller land masses similar
to the Caribbean greater Adria would
have been a vast collections of islands
and coral atolls separated by shallow
and warm tropical seas it's too bad that
Greater Adria sank almost 200 million
years before the first proto humans
walked the earth but I'm sure the
theropods made good use of it
unfortunately for the dinosaur tourism
industry Greater Adria didn't stick
around most of it sank into the Earth's
mantle following a collision with
mainland Europe
not long after its formation most of the
tectonic plates submerged beneath the
one Europe sits on with the remaining
chunks being scooped up by southern
Europe and Western Asia this tectonic
collision left lasting marks on the
shape of Europe today the Apennine
Mountains which runs the length of the
boot of Italy would exist without the
last vestiges of greater Adria scraping
off on the bottom of the Alps other
remnants would end up merging with the
coastlines of Croatia Greece and Turkey
meaning that there are still places
where you can stand on a piece of this
vanished landmass finding this sunken
landmass was no easy feat and took years
of research by geologists from multiple
countries you see southern Europe is
what experts refer to as a mess this is
not a joke by the way dr. Dow even hens
Bergen who led the team that made this
discovery describe the region by saying
it is quite simply a geological mess
everything is curved broken and stacked
he contrasted it with the Himalayas
which have relatively few major fault
lines stretching across the region
Europe meanwhile is a mess of fragmented
geological systems it was only through
the use of extensive surveys and
state-of-the-art computer models that
researchers could guess at what greater
Adriel once looked like as well as where
it's fragments ended up
researchers may even be able to guess at
what the region might look like in the
distant future in addition to making
geologists mouth water locating the
fragments of Greater Adria also serves a
more practical purpose then hens burger
believes that the mountain range is
created by these continental shards
could be unusually rich in mineral
deposits locating where they ended up
could play a significant role in the
future economy of the Mediterranean
region number to Zealandia greater Adria
may be the most recent sunken continent
to be discovered but not the only one by
far aspiring geologists looking for
another lost world might turn their
attention to the South Pacific and the
unassuming island nation of New Zealand
most people know it for sheep and Lord
of the Rings movies but this small
mountainous country is hiding a huge
secret behind its green valleys and
sweeping vistas new zealand like many
islands is little more than the top of a
vast underwater mountain range what
makes it different from other island
groups is the sprawling sunken continent
reaching out in all directions from
those central Peaks known as Zealandia
this submerged landmass sunk into the
Pacific Ocean relatively recently having
underwent its descent a mere 23 million
years ago Zealandia is believed to have
broken away from Australia around 60 to
85 million years ago I wasn't around
then but with a total area of over 1
million square miles
Zealandia is more than half the size of
its parent continent and much larger
than Greater Adria another difference
between the two is that whereas Greater
Adria was more of a group of islands
Zealandia would have been entirely above
water at one time this vast landmass
stretched Northwest to southeast roughly
perpendicular to modern New Zealand
fossil records even indicate that there
may have been animals on the continent
before it was swallowed up by the rising
Pacific Ocean at the end of the last ice
age notably if Zealandia had somehow
remained above sea level its size and
close proximity to Australia
would have had a significant impact on
the other continents climate the warm
temperatures of southeastern Australia
are due in large part to the eastern
Australia current-carrying warm water
from the tropics that's right the EAC
can shape the landscape of an entire
continent dude if Zealandia were above
water it would interrupt the EAC
hogging all that tropical warmth for
itself like the greedy landmass it is
this would result in places like Sydney
Australia being much colder and drier
than they are today it wouldn't turn
southern Australia into an Arctic tundra
but the continent might be more in line
with North Dakota than the subtropical
paradise we know granted this would have
happened in the myths of an ice ages
glacial period if that were the case I
imagine everywhere would be a lot colder
not just Australia can you think of any
other simple changes to history that
would have had enormous consequences why
don't you head down to the comments and
let me know number-three doggerel and
okay so I have a confession to make I'm
kind of playing a bit fast and loose
when I call doggerland a lost continent
submerged isthmus just doesn't have the
same ring to it you know what
differentiates doggerland from the first
two entries on this list is that it
existed recently enough for humans to
have set foot on this lost land we're
talking about thousands of years rather
than Millions I wasn't around then but
at its greatest extent in the year
16,000 BC this landmass stretched from
Denmark to France and reached out to
envelop the British Isles
it's named after dogger Bank a submerged
plateau halfway between England and
Denmark thousands of years ago this Bank
was part of a sprawling landmass
connecting Britain to mainland Europe
modern humans are known to have begun
inhabiting the region between the years
of 10,000 and 4000 BC as evidenced by
the discovery of Flint and bone tools on
the floor of the English Channel and
let's not forget our closest biological
relatives the Neanderthals who inhabited
the region about 40,000 years ago and a
couple of which I went to high school
with as with all good things doggerland
eventually came to an end and as with
Zealandia it was receding glaciers and
rising sea levels that did this landmass
in in this case they were likely
assisted by a massive tsunami that's
believed to have struck the region in
the 62 hundreds BC devouring much of the
northern coastline dogger Bank managed
to hold out a bit longer than the rest
of the subcontinent remaining above
water until at least the year 5000 BC if
there's any good news for doggerland
it's that it's possibly the most well
known continent on this list it even
warranted a mention in a story by famed
British author HG Wells not something
many submerged land masses can boast and
before anyone asks know as awesome as it
would be there's no evidence doggerland
was home to an unusual number of dogs I
around then hey if you learn something
new today
then give the video a like and share it
with a friend and here are some other
cool videos I think you'll enjoy just
click on the left or right one and
remember stay on the bright side of life